SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME -
MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL ANALYSIS  
A PROJECT REPORT ON 
 
 
 
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the award of the degree of 
 
 
BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY 
in 
 
ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING 
 
Submitted by 
 
D. NAGA JASWANTH 22JR5A0406 
E. P. L. NARASIMHA 21JR1A0459 
 
B. AAKASH 21JR1A0436 
B. ASHOK BABU 21JR1A0446 
 
Under the Guidance of 
Mrs. SD. VAHEEDHA, M. Tech 
Assistant Professor 
 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING 
KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES
 (AUTONOMOUS) 
Vinjanampadu (V), Vatticherukuru (M), Guntur -522017 
 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY KAKINADA: KAKINADA 
APRIL-2025 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING 
KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES (Autonomous) 
(Approved by AICTE New Delhi || Permanently Affiliated to JNTUK, Kakinada) || Accredited with ‘A’ 
Grade by NAAC || NBA Accreditation) 
Vinjanampadu (V), Vatticherukuru (M), Guntur (Dt), A.P-522017. 
 
 
 
 
 
CERTIFICATE 
This is to certify that this project work entitled “SMART ENERGY METER WITH 
REALTIME-MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL ANALYSIS ” is a Bonafide work of 
Mr. D. NAGA JASWANTH  (22JR5A0416), Mr. E .  P .  L .  N A R A S I M H A  
(21JR1A0459), Mr. B. AAKASH(21JR1A0436), Mr. B. ASHOK KUMAR (21JR1A0446) to 
Jawaharlal Nehru University Kakinada, through KKR &  KSR Institute of Technology and 
Sciences for the award of the Degree of Bachelor of Technology in Electronics and 
Communication Engineering  is a bonafide record of project work carried out by Mrs. SD. 
Vaheedha under my supervision during the year 2021-2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPERVISOR Head of Department 
ECE 
Mrs. SD. VAHEEDHA, M. Tech. Dr. N. Adi Narayana, M.Tech, Ph.D 
Assistant Professor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  INTERNAL EXAMINAR EXTERNAL EXAMINAR 
DECLARATION 
 
We hereby declare that the project “SMART ENERGY METER WITH 
REALTIME-MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL ANALYSIS ” has 
been carried out by me and this work has been submitted to KKR & KSR Institute 
of Technology and Sciences (A), Vinjanampadu, affiliated to Jawaharlal Nehru 
Technological University, Kakinada in par tial fulfillment of the requirements for 
the award of degree of Bachelor of Technology in Department Of Electronics And 
Communication Engineering. 
 
We further declare that this project work has not been submitted in full or part for the 
award of any other degree in any other educational institutions. 
 
 
 
 
1. 22JR5A0406     DAMARAVARAPU NAGA JASWANTH    -      Signature 
          
 
 
          2. 21JR1A0459     EKA P. L. NARASIMHA    -      Signature 
 
 
         3. 21JR1A0436     BANISETTI AAKASH    -      Signature 
 
 
 4. Roll Number     BOLLU ASHOK BABU    -      Signature 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We express our sincere gratitude and indebtedness to Mr. K. Subba Rao, Chairman and 
Mr. K. Sekhar , Secretary of the esteemed institution KKR and KSR INSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES (AUTONOMOUS) for providing us with all the necessary 
support. 
We render my deep sense of gratitude of Dr. P. BABU, the Principal for permitting us to 
carry out our project work. I would also like to thank the ELECTRONICS AND 
COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING staff for lending me their time to help us and to complete 
our work successfully. 
We render our deep sense of gratitude to Dr. K. HARI BABU Director (academics) for 
permitting us to carry out our project work. We are highly indebted to Dr. N. Adi Narayana, Head 
of the Department of ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING for providing 
us with all the necessary support. 
We would like to express our gratitude towards Mrs. SD. VAHEEDHA , M. Tech, 
Assistant Professor , DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION  
ENGINEERING, who played a supervisory role to the utmost perfection, enabled us to seek our main  
project and for guiding with an internal guide methodically and meticulously. 
We express our wholehearted thanks to our PROJECT CO -ORDINATOR Dr. M. 
RAMBABU NAIK, friends and staff for their wishes and for helping in the successful completion 
of this project. 
 
By 
 
 
 
D. NAGA JASWANTH 22JR5A0406 
E. P. L. NARASIMHA 21JR1A0459 
B. AAKASH 21JR1A0436 
B. ASHOK BABU 21JR1A0446 KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
v 
 
 
 
 
INSTITUTION VISION 
 
To produce eminent and ethical Engineers and Managers for society through 
imparting quality professional education with an emphasis  on human values  
andholistic excellence. 
INSTITUTION MISSION 
 
 To incorporate benchmarked teaching and learning pedagogies in the curriculum. 
 To ensure the all-round development of students through a judicious 
blend of curricular, 
Co-curricular and extracurricular activities. 
 To support the cross-cultural exchange of knowledge between industry and academy. 
 To provide higher/continued education and research opportunities to the 
employees ofthe institution. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ECE 
 
VISION 
 
Developing highly qualitative, technically competent and socially responsible engineers. 
 
MISSION 
 
To provide quality education in the domain of Electronics and  
Communication Engineering through. 
 Enriched curriculum for addressing the needs of Industry. KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
vi 
 
 
 Effective teaching and learning processes through the congenial environment. 
 
 
Gaining contemporary knowledge through research, development, and co- 
curricular activities. 
 
POs & PEOs 
The Department has a formally stated quality policy which is being implemented 
through a well -structured body called Internal Quality Assurance Cell. Since quality 
enhancement is a continuous process, the IQAC is a part of the system and works towards 
realizing the goals of quality enhancement and sustenance. 
 
Program Outcomes (PO’s) 
 
1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering 
fundamentals, and an engineering specialization to the solution of complex engineering 
problems. 
2. Problem analysis: Identify, formulate, research literature, and analyze complex 
engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principles of 
mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences. 
3. Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems 
and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with 
appropriate consideration for the public health and safety, and the cultural, societal, and 
environmental considerations. 
4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research -based knowledge and 
research methods  including design of experiments, analysis and interpretation of data, 
and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 
5. Modern tool usage: Create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and 
modern engineering  and IT tools including prediction and modeling to complex 
engineering activities with an understanding of the limitations. KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
vii 
 
 
6. The engineer and society: Apply reasoning informed by the contextual knowledge to 
assess societal,  health, safety, legal and cultural issues and the consequent 
responsibilities relevant tothe professional engineering practice. 
7. Environment and sustainability: Understand the impact of the professional 
engineering solutions  in societal and environmental contexts, and demonstrate the 
knowledge of, and need for sustainable development. 
8. Ethics: Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics and responsibilities 
and norms of the engineering practice. 
9. Individual and team work: Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or 
leader in diverse teams, and in multidisciplinary settings. 
10. Communication: Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities with the 
engineering community and with society at large, such as, being able to comprehend and 
write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give 
and receive clear instructions. 
11. Project management and finance : Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the 
engineering and management principles and apply these to one’s own work, as a 
member and leader in a team, to manage projects and in multidisciplinary environments. 
12. Life-long learning : Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to 
engage in independent  and life -long learning in  the broadest context of technological  
change. 
 
 
 
Program Specific Outcomes (PSO’s) 
PSO1 
Professional Skills: 
To understand the basic concepts of Electronics & Communication 
Engineering and to apply them to various areas, like Electronics, Communications, 
VLSI, and Embedded systems to arrive cost-effective and appropriate solutions. KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
vii
i 
 
 
PSO2 
Problem-solving skills: 
To be equipped with the principles of Semiconductor Devices, Digital 
Systems, Microprocessor and Signal processing for the fields of Consumer 
Electronics, Medical, Defense and Spacecraft Electronics industry 
PSO3 
Successful career: 
To be successful in  professional career  by using latest hardware  and 
software tools like VHDL, MATLAB, MULTISIM, MENTOR GRAPHICS along 
with analytical skills to work in core industries 
PSO4 
Exposure for research and development: 
To analyze latest trends  in Electronics and Communication and apply the 
knowledge for the improvement in the present technology by doing research through 
higher education. 
 
 
ECE Program Educational Objectives 
 
 
Graduates of Electronics & Communication Engineering Shall 
PEO1 
Develop a strong background in basic science and mathematics and ability to 
use these tools in their chosen fields of specialization. 
PEO2 KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
ix 
 
 
Have the ability to demonstrate technical competence in the fields of 
electronics and communication engineering and develop solutions to the problems. 
PEO3 
Attain professional competence through life-long learning such as advanced 
degrees, professional registration, and other professional activities. 
PEO4 
Function effectively in a multi-disciplinary environment and individually, 
within a global, societal, and environmental context. 
PEO5 
Take individual responsibility and to work as a part of a team 
towards the fulfillment of both individual and organizational goals. KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
x 
 
 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES 
 
C 409.1 Design and develop  an IoT -based Smart Energy Meter system capable of 
real-time monitoring of voltage, current, power, and energy consumption. 
C 409.2 Implement predictive algorithms  to estimate monthly electricity 
bills based on real-time energy usage data. 
C 409.3 Integrate cloud technologies  Thingspeak and mobile platforms (Blynk) for 
remote data visualization, storage, and device control. 
C 409.4 Develop automation mechanisms  for household electrical loads using relay 
modules, enabling remote switching and energy optimization. 
C 409.5 Generate real-time alerts and notifications for high voltage events, threshold breaches, 
and abnormal energy consumption to enhance system reliability and safety.. 
C 409.6 Analyze and evaluate  the performance of the Smart Energy Meter system to 
ensure energy efficiency, data accuracy, and cost -effectiveness in real -world 
environments. 
 
Course Outcomes - Co-Po Mapping 
 
 PO 
1 
PO 
2 
PO 
3 
PO 
4 
PO 
5 
PO 
6 
P0 
7 
PO 
8 
PO 
9 
PO1 
0 
PO1 
1 
PO1 
2 
PSO1 PSO2 PSO 
3 
PSO 
4 
CO421. 
1 
3  2              
CO421. 
2 
                
CO421. 
3 
                
CO421. 
4 
                
CO421. 
5 
                
CO421. 
6 
                
 
3: High 2: Medium 1: Low KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(AUTONOMOUS) 
(Accredited by NAAC with ‘A’ grade, Approved by AICTE, New Delhi & Affiliated to JNTU Kakinada) 
xi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Educational Objectives – Program Specific Outcomes 
correlation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PSO1 PSO2 PSO3 PSO4 
PEO1     
PEO2     
PEO3     
PEO4     
PEO5     
 
3: High 2: Medium 1: Low  
 
INDEX 
 
CONTENTS PAGE NO. 
ABSTRACT i 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Overview  
1.2 Objective  
1.3 Organization Of the Thesis  
CHAPTER 2 : Literature Survey 
                   2.1  Literature Survey  
CHAPTER 3 :Existing Work with references  
CHAPTER 4: Proposed work  
4.1 Introduction  
4.2 Block Diagram  
4.3 Working Procedure  
4.4 Flow Chart  
4.5 Hardware Components  
4.6 Description of Major Components  
4.6.1   ESP32 Microcontroller  
4.6.1.1 Features and specifications  
4.6.1.2 GPIO pin configuration  
4.6.1.3 Communication interfaces (I2C, UART, Wi-Fi)  
4.6.1.4 Role in the energy meter system  
4.6.2   PZEM-004T Energy Meter  
4.6.2.1 Working principle  
4.6.2.2 Electrical parameters  
4.6.2.3 Connection with ESP32  
4.6.2.4 Communication protocol (UART)  
4.6.3   ACS712 Current Sensor  
4.6.3.1 Overview of ACS712  
4.6.3.2 Measuring Individual loads  
4.6.3.3 Sensitivity and output voltage relation   
 
4.6.3.4 Interfacing with ESP32  
4.6.3.5 Calculation of current and power   
4.6.4  4-channel Relay Module  
4.6.4.1 Relay Module working principle  
4.6.4.2 Operating Voltages and currents  
4.6.4.3 Controlling of Individual Loads  
4.6.4.4 Interfacing with ESP32  
4.6.5  DHT11 Temperature Sensor  
4.6.5.1 Features and Specifications   
4.6.5.2 Temperature and humidity sensing   
4.6.5.3 Connection and data from ESP32  
4.6.6  16x2 I2C Display  
4.6.6.1 LCD Display Specifications  
4.6.6.2 I2C communication protocol  
4.6.6.3 Interfacing with ESP32  
4.6.7  Power supply  
4.6.7.1 Power requirements for ESP32  
4.6.7.2 5V and 3.3V voltage regulation  
4.6.7.3 Power supply circuit design   
4.7.8Arduino IDE 2.3.4 Setup  
                                    4.7.8.1 Introduction   
 4.7.8.2  Install Arduino IDE   
    4.7.9 Blynk Application   
                                                     4.7.9.1 Introductions and  
                                                4.7.9.2 Setup 
                                              4..7.10 Thinkspeak    
                                                 4.7.10.1   Introduction   
                                                 4.7.10.2   Setup 
                     
4.7 Project Code  
 
        
              CHAPTER 5: Testing and Result Analysis           
 
   
  5.1 TestCase1 
  5.2 TestCase2 
  5.3 TestCase3 
  5.4 Test case4 
  5.5 Test Case5 
CHAPTER 6: Conclusions and Scope for Future work 
   6.1 Conclusion 
   6.2 Future Scope 
  
 
                                        
 
    
 
ABSTRACT 
In With the increasing  demand for efficient energy management, traditional 
electricity meter fails to provide real-time insights into power consumption. This project  
presents the design and implementation of a Smart Energy Meter with Real -Time 
Monitoring and predictive bill ana lysis using an ESP32 microcontroller. The system 
integrates a PZEM -004T energy meter for total power measurements, ACS712 current 
sensors for individual load monitoring, and a DHT11 sensor for environmental 
parameters. A 4 -channel relay module allows remot e load control, while a 16x2 I2C 
LCD display provides real -time energy data and also get the data in Thingspeak 
platform and we will download in .csv file format. 
The Smart meter continuously measures voltage, current, power and ene rgy 
consumption and calculates predictive billing based on past trends. The data is displayed 
locally and transmitted to the Blynk IoT platform, enabling users to monitor energy 
usage and control loads remotely. The proposed design enhances consumer awareness, 
improved energy efficiency and offers a cost-effective solution for Home Automation  
 
 
Keywords— Smart Energy Meter, ESP32, PZEM-004T, ACS712, Real-time Monitoring, 
Predictive Bill Analysis, IoT, Home Automation, Blynk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 LIST OF FIGURES  Department of ECE, KITS Page No 18 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME -MONITORING 
AND PREDICTIVE BILL ANALYSIS 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Overview 
Electricity consumption has become an essential aspect of modern life, with 
increasing demand in residential, commercial, and industrial sectors. Traditional 
energy meters, which rely on manual readings and post -consumption billing, 
often lack rea l-time monitoring and predictive analysis capabilities. This 
limitation results in inefficient energy usage, unexpected high electricity bills, 
and a lack of user awareness regarding energy consumption patterns. 
To overcome these challenges, this project i ntroduces a Smart Energy Meter  
capable of real-time energy monitoring, predictive bill analysis, and remote 
load control  using IoT technology. The proposed system utilizes an ESP32 
microcontroller interfaced with a PZEM-004T energy meter  for total power 
measurement and ACS712 current sensors  to monitor individual loads. 
Additionally, a DHT11 sensor  is integrated to measure environmental 
parameters such as temperature and humidity. A 4-channel relay module is used 
to control appliances, while a 16x2 I2C LCD display provides real -time 
feedback. 
By leveraging IoT and cloud -based solutions, the system sends energy 
consumption data to the Blynk platform, enabling users to access power usage 
statistics remotely. The predictive bill analysis  feature estimates futur e 
electricity costs based on past consumption patterns, helping consumers make 
informed decisions about energy usage. Furthermore, users can set predefined 
consumption thresholds, receiving alerts when energy usage exceeds expected 
limits. This proactive a pproach to energy management  enhances efficiency, 
reduces costs, and promotes sustainable electricity consumption. Department of ECE, KITS Page No 19 
 
 
 
1.2 Objectives 
The primary objective of this project is to design and implement a smart energy 
meter that enables users to monitor and contr ol their electricity usage effectively. 
The specific goals of the system are as follows: 
1. Real-Time Energy Monitoring:  Measure voltage, current, power, and energy 
consumption using PZEM-004T and ACS712 sensors. 
2. Predictive Bill Analysis:  Calculate electricit y costs based on past trends to 
help users anticipate their monthly bills. 
3. Remote Load Control: Enable users to turn appliances on or off remotely via 
the Blynk platform. 
4. User-Friendly Display: Provide real-time readings on a 16x2 I2C LCD display 
for easy on-site monitoring. 
5. Threshold-Based Alerts:  Notify users when energy consumption exceeds 
predefined limits. 
6. Home Automation Integration:  Allow smart control of electrical loads 
through relays for better energy management. 
By achieving these objectives, the  smart energy meter ensures transparency in 
electricity consumption, encourages efficient usage, and provides a cost -effective 
solution for modern energy monitoring. 
 
1.3 Motivation and Need for Smart Energy Meters 
The growing global focus on energy effici ency, sustainability, and cost 
reduction has highlighted the need for smarter electricity management solutions. 
Traditional meters only provide cumulative energy usage without real -time 
tracking, making it difficult for users to optimize their consumption patterns. 
In many households and businesses, unexpected high electricity bills  are a 
common issue. Users often do not realize their excessive energy usage until they 
receive their monthly bill. A smart energy meter bridges this gap by continuously 
monitoring power consumption  and providing real-time alerts and insights , Department of ECE, KITS Page No 20 
 
 
enabling users to make informed energy-saving decisions. 
Moreover, the rise of home automation and IoT-based smart systems has led to 
increased demand for remote monitoring and control solut ions. A smart energy 
meter with IoT integration not only tracks consumption but also allows users to 
remotely control appliances, reducing unnecessary power wastage. 
Additionally, industries and large -scale consumers often experience power losses 
due to inefficient load management . By implementing a predictive bill analysis 
system, businesses can estimate electricity expenses in advance  and optimize 
their operations accordingly. This approach also contributes to sustainable energy 
practices by encouraging users to adopt energy-efficient appliances and reduce 
excessive consumption. 
 
1.4 Organization of the Report 
This report is structured into multiple chapters, each covering different aspects of 
the smart energy meter project: 
 Chapter 1: Introduction  – Provides an overview of the project, objectives, 
motivation, and necessity of smart energy meters. 
 Chapter 2: Literature Survey & System Architecture  – Discusses existing 
energy metering systems, their limitations, and the proposed solution. 
 Chapter 3: Method ology – Explains the block diagram, working principles, 
hardware integration, and software implementation. 
 Chapter 4: Hardware Components  – Covers a detailed description of all 
hardware components used in the project. 
 Chapter 5: Software Implementation  – Explains the software development 
process, including coding, data processing, and remote control features. 
 Chapter 6: Results and Discussion  – Analyzes the performance of the system 
based on real-time testing and observations. 
 Chapter 7: Conclusion and Futu re Enhancements  – Summarizes the key 
findings and suggests future improvements for the system. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
21  
 
CHAPTER 2 
2.1 Literature survey 
 
1. Smart Energy Management and Load Monitoring of Individual 
Loads 
The work by Mohamed Aashik et al. presents an IoT -based energy management 
system targeting the measurement and monitoring of energy consumption of individual 
household appliances. Unlike conventional meters that provide only the total 
consumption, their proposed system measures the power used by each device 
separately using ESP32, voltage, and current sensors. Data is processed and displayed 
through a web application, enabling users to detect anomalies and forecast equipment 
lifespan based on usage. 
The authors highlight the limitations of existing energy meters, such as the lack of 
individual load monitoring, cost calculations, remote control, and malfunction alerts. 
To address these, the proposed system uses a voltage sensor (ZMPT101B) an d current 
sensor (SCT-013) along with relay modules for load control. Real -time statistics like 
energy consumption, cost estimation, and load behavior are stored and visualized 
through a mobile -friendly web interface, enhancing user engagement and energy -
saving awareness. 
The study emphasizes the critical need for energy conservation, especially given the 
increasing energy consumption trends in India’s residential and commercial sectors. 
The proposed prototype allows users to control appliances remotely, mo nitor energy 
usage continuously, and predict device health — thus paving the way for efficient and 
intelligent energy management systems. 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
22  
2. Energy Meter Based Wireless Monitoring System Using Blynk 
Application 
Ammar Othman and Nur Hafiza Zakaria  developed a wireless energy monitoring 
system using the Blynk application and ESP32, aimed at simplifying electricity usage 
tracking for users. The system addresses issues faced during the COVID -19 pandemic 
when manual meter reading was suspended, providi ng a reliable solution through IoT 
and smartphone integration. By sending real-time energy consumption data to a mobile 
app, the system enhances user trust in digital meters and promotes energy -saving 
habits via notifications. 
The research introduces the c oncept of integrating backup battery systems to ensure 
continuous operation even during power outages. The system calculates RMS voltage 
and current, power, and energy consumption using AC sensors. Moreover, the Blynk 
application provides user-friendly visualization of energy metrics and notifications for 
over-consumption, thus making users more aware of their energy patterns and 
encouraging responsible usage. 
In the future, the authors propose embedding Artificial Intelligence (AI) into such 
energy management systems. AI can automate decision -making processes, improving 
load management efficiency in smart homes. The paper lays the groundwork for 
smarter, more resilient energy monitoring solutions that combine IoT with intelligent 
analytics for optimal energy utilization. 
 
3. ESP32 Based Electric Energy Consumption Meter 
Paul Stone Macheso and Doreen Thotho propose a cost -effective smart energy 
monitoring solution using ESP32, SCT -013 current sensors, and ZMPT101B voltage 
sensors. Their system collects real -time energy consumption data and uploads it to the 
Blynk server, enabling users to monitor key parameters like voltage, current, active 
power, and energy consumption remotely. The IoT -based architecture ensures that 
even traditional digital meters can be e nhanced for real-time monitoring through cloud 
connectivity. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
23  
The paper reviews existing energy monitoring systems, citing solutions based on GSM, 
Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi communications. It critiques their limitations, such as high costs 
and limited data acces sibility. By leveraging the ESP32's Wi -Fi capabilities, the 
proposed system reduces complexity and improves reliability. The use of non -invasive 
sensors ensures ease of installation without modifying existing electrical wiring. 
Additionally, the authors de monstrate the practical benefits of their system, including 
detecting abnormal energy consumption patterns, forecasting electricity costs, and 
providing actionable insights to consumers. Their approach significantly contributes to 
the global move toward sm art grids and energy -efficient homes by offering an 
affordable and easily deployable solution. 
 
4. IoT-Based Smart Energy Meter 
Sanket Tule et al. present an IoT -based smart energy meter that automates energy 
monitoring and billing using the HLW8012 senso r and ESP32 microcontroller. The 
system continuously tracks consumption and updates the total bill in real -time through 
a smartphone application. This automation reduces human error, labor costs, and 
delays associated with traditional manual reading method s, offering a seamless and 
transparent billing system for both consumers and suppliers. 
The proposed design uses the Virtuino app for mobile visualization, displaying key 
parameters like voltage, current, power, and total units consumed. Distance switching  
of loads is made possible, empowering users to control their home appliances 
remotely. The system also supports multiple user logins (for users and administrators), 
enhancing management efficiency and security. 
By incorporating cloud communication, the sm art meter prototype provides a future -
ready platform that can be expanded into prepaid metering models. This development 
is particularly significant for electricity distribution companies in regions like India, 
where manual errors and tampering issues are prevalent, thereby modernizing energy 
infrastructure with minimal operational disruptions. 
 
5. Design of a Smart Energy Meter SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
24  
Niloy Mondal and Ravisankar Ch propose an IoT -based smart energy meter design 
utilizing ESP32, ZMPT101B voltage sensors, and ACS712 current sensors. Their 
system enables real -time monitoring of household energy consumption, with data 
displayed on a 16x2 LCD and sent to a mobile application via the Blynk platform. The 
integrated relay module allows users to remotely control electrical loads, enhancing the 
interactivity of the energy management system. 
The authors focus on improving transparency and reducing corruption associated with 
manual meter reading processes. By automating meter readings and bill generation, 
their design empowers consumers to view detailed breakdowns of daily, monthly, and 
yearly energy usage. The system also implements safety features like load 
disconnection in case of overcurrent conditions, ensuring appliance protection and 
consumer safety. 
Through cloud i ntegration, the proposed system provides detailed, graphical data 
analysis, offering users actionable insights into their consumption patterns. The ability 
to control loads remotely via a smartphone app, combined with real -time monitoring, 
positions this smart energy meter as a critical advancement towards achieving efficient 
and user-friendly smart home energy management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
25  
CHAPTER 3 
 
Existing System 
 Energy consumption monitoring has traditionally relied on electromechanical 
energy meters, which have been widely used in residential, commercial, and industrial 
sectors. These meters operate based on an induction mechanism , where a rotating 
aluminum disk moves proportionally to the amount of energy consumed. The 
cumulative energy usage is dis played on a mechanical counter, requiring manual 
reading by utility personnel  at regular intervals. While these meters have been reliable 
for decades, they suffer from several limitations , including the lack of real-time 
monitoring, remote access, and auto mation. Additionally, human errors in manual 
meter readings often lead to billing discrepancies , causing inconvenience for both 
consumers and utility providers. 
                
 
To address the shortcomings of electromechanical meters, digital energy meters were 
introduced. These meters incorporate microcontrollers and electronic sensors  to 
measure voltage, current, and power more accurately. They provide electronic displays 
that eliminate the need for mechanical counters and enable automated data stor age. 
Some digital meters also include tamper detection mechanisms  to prevent fraudulent 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
26  
activities and prepaid metering options , allowing consumers to recharge their 
electricity balance in advance. However, despite these improvements, digital meters 
still do not provide real -time consumption insights or remote monitoring capabilities , 
leaving consumers unaware of their energy usage patterns until they receive their 
monthly bills. 
With advancements in Internet of Things (IoT) technology , smart energy meters  have 
emerged as a more efficient alternative to conventional energy meters. These meters 
integrate wireless communication technologies  such as Wi-Fi, GSM, ZigBee, or 
Bluetooth, allowing real-time data transmission to cloud -based platforms. IoT-enabled 
meters use microcontrollers like ESP32, Raspberry Pi, or Arduino , along with sensors 
such as PZEM -004T for total energy measurement and ACS712 for individual load 
current sensing. The integration of cloud computing enables users to remotely access 
their energy  consumption data through mobile applications , providing greater 
transparency and control over power usage. 
Despite the advantages of IoT -based smart meters, existing systems still have 
limitations. Most smart meters primarily focus on total energy consumption monitoring 
rather than tracking individual appliances separately . This lack of granularity prevents 
users from identifying which specific loads contribute the most to their electricity bills. 
Furthermore, many smart meters do not include predic tive billing analysis , meaning 
users cannot estimate their future electricity costs based on their current usage trends. 
This absence of forecasting capabilities makes it difficult for consumers to plan and 
optimize their energy consumption effectively. 
Another critical drawback of the existing smart metering systems is the delayed billing 
cycle, which prevents proactive energy management. Consumers only receive their 
electricity bills at the end of the billing period, leading to unexpected high charges and 
limited opportunities for corrective actions . Additionally, most systems do not provide 
threshold-based alerts , which means consumers remain unaware when their power 
consumption exceeds predefined limits. Without such alerts, users cannot take 
preventive measures to reduce excessive energy usage, potentially leading to higher 
costs and inefficiencies. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
27  
Moreover, many existing smart meters lack remote load control functionalities , 
limiting the ability to turn appliances on or off from a remote location. Home 
automation features  are becoming increasingly important in modern energy 
management systems, as they allow users to optimize electricity usage by controlling 
appliances via mobile applications. However, most current solutions focus only on 
monitoring and reporting, rather than providing an interactive system that allows users 
to take real-time actions based on energy consumption data.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
28  
CHAPTER 4 
 
 Proposed System 
 
 The proposed smart energy meter  aims to overcome the limitations of 
traditional electromechanical, digital, and existing smart meters by providing 
real-time monitoring, predictive bill analysis, and load control using IoT -based 
automation. The system is designed to offer detailed energy insights  by 
measuring both total energy consumption and individual load usage , enabling 
consumers to make informed decisions about their electricity consumption and 
reduce unnecessary energy wastage. 
1. System Overview 
The proposed system utilizes the ESP32 microcontroller , which acts as the 
central processing unit, interfacing with various sensors and modules  to collect, 
process, and transmit energy -related data. The PZEM-004T energy meter  is 
employed to measure voltage, current, power, and total energy consumption , 
while ACS712 current sensors  are used to track the energy usage of individual 
loads. A 4-channel relay module  enables users to remotely control appliances, 
allowing efficient energy management. Additionally, a DHT11 sensor is included 
to monitor temperature and humidity , helping to analyze environmental factors 
that might impact power consumption. 
A 16x2 I2C LCD display  is integrated to provide real -time ener gy readings, 
making it easy for users to check their power consumption at a glance. The 
system is designed to be cost-effective, efficient, and scalable, making it suitable 
for both residential and industrial applications. 
2. Real-Time Monitoring and Data Processing 
One of the key advantages  of the proposed system is its real-time monitoring 
capability. Unlike conventional meters that require manual readings or offer 
delayed billing information, this system continuously measures energy usage and 
updates the  user interface with real -time data. The ESP32 microcontroller SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
29  
processes voltage and current values  from the sensors and calculates power 
consumption using the formula: 
Power (W) = Voltage (V)×Current (A) 
The energy consumption is then determined using: 
Energy (kWh) =  Power (W)×Time (h)*3600/1000 
This ensures accurate tracking of both total and individual load consumption , 
helping users identify high-energy-consuming appliances  and take corrective 
actions to optimize electricity usage. 
3. Predictive Bill Analysis 
A major improvement in the proposed system is the implementation of predictive 
bill analysis . The system continuously monitors energy usage trends and 
calculates an estimated monthly electricity bill  based on real -time consumption 
patterns. This  feature allows users to anticipate their energy costs  and make 
adjustments before the end of the billing cycle, preventing unexpected high 
charges. 
 
The bill estimation is computed based on: 
Estimated Bill=Total Energy Consumed ×Per-Unit Electricity Cost 
{Estimated Bill} = {Total Energy Consumed} \{Per-Unit Electricity Cost} 
This feature is particularly beneficial for households and businesses aiming to 
stay within a budgeted energy expenditure. 
4. Load Control and Home Automation 
To further enhance energy efficiency, the proposed system includes remote load 
control via a 4-channel relay module . Users can switch appliances ON/OFF  
directly through the system interface, providing greater control over electricity 
usage. This feature helps in: SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
30  
Reducing unnecessary power wastage by turning off idle devices. 
Enhancing safety  by remotely disconnecting faulty or high -energy-consuming 
appliances. 
Improving convenience by allowing automation of energy usage based on pre-set 
schedules. 
5. User Interface and Display Mechanism 
A 16x2 I2C LCD display is used to provide real-time power consumption details, 
including: 
 Voltage (V) and Current (A) 
 Total Power Consumption (W) 
 Energy Consumed (kWh) 
 Predicted Monthly Bill (Currency Unit) 
This feature ensures that users can easily  track their electricity usage without 
requiring external applications or cloud storage. 
6. Advantages of the Proposed System 
Compared to traditional and existing smart meters, the proposed system offers 
several advantages , including:  
Real-time Energy Monitoring – Provides instant insights into power usage.  
Predictive Bill Analysis  – Estimates electricity costs before the billing cycle 
ends. 
Individual Load Tracking  – Monitors consumption of specific appliances.  
Remote Load Control  – Allows switching of  appliances using relays.  
Cost-Effective and Scalable  – Can be expanded to include more sensors or 
integrate with smart home systems. 
The proposed smart energy meter bridges the gap between conventional metering 
and modern IoT -based energy management solutions. By providing real-time 
monitoring, predictive billing, and remote load control , the system empowers SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
31  
users to make energy-efficient decisions, reduce electricity costs, and contribute 
to sustainable energy consumption . This innovative approach en sures a smarter, 
more interactive, and cost -effective energy management system suitable for 
residential and industrial applications. 
METHODOLOGY 
This chapter deals with the design and development overview of 
the application,  a brief description  of hardware  requirements, software  
system tools and its implementation. 
The proposed system smart energy meter bridges the gap between 
conventional metering and modern IoT -based energy management 
solutions. By providing  real-time monitoring, predictive billing, and 
remote load control, the system empowers users to make energy-efficient 
decisions, reduce electricity  costs, and contribute to  sustainable energy 
consumption. This innovative approach ensures a  smarter, more 
interactive, and cost -effective energy management  system suitable for 
residential and industrial applications. 
 Block Diagram 
 
 
 
Fig 3.1: Block diagram of Smart Energy Meter 
 
Working Procedure 
The whole operation of this project is majorly divided into 
DHT 11 
sensor 
Thingspeak SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
32  
7steps. 
Those are as mentioned below. 
The smart energy meter  operates through a systematic process  that involves data 
acquisition, processing, display, and control . The system continuously monitors 
voltage, current, power, and energy consumption, providing real -time insights and 
enabling efficient energy management. The following steps outline the working 
procedure of the system: 
 
1. Power Supply Initialization 
 The system is powered using a regulated power supply, ensuring stable voltage 
to the ESP32 microcontroller and other components. 
 The ESP32 initializes all the necessary peripherals, including the PZEM-004T 
energy meter, ACS712 current sensors, DHT11 temperature sensor, relays, and 
LCD display. 
 
2. Data Acquisition 
 Total Load Measurement: 
The PZEM-004T sensor  continuously measures voltage (V), current 
(A), power (W), energy consumption (kWh), power factor, and 
frequency from the main power source. 
 Individual Load Monitoring: 
The ACS712 sensors are connected to different appliances, allowing the 
system to track power consumption of individual loads separately. 
 Environmental Data Collection: 
The DHT11 sensor captures temperature and humidity  data, which can 
help analyze the impact of environmental conditions on energy usage. 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
33  
3. Data Processing and Computation 
i. The ESP32 processes the raw data received from the PZEM-004T and ACS712 
sensors. 
ii. Using the measured voltage and current, power consumption is calculated as: 
                   Power (W) = Voltage (V)×Current (A) 
          Energy consumption over time is computed as:   
             Energy (kWh) =  Power (W)×Time (h)*3600/1000 
iii. The system also estimates the monthly electricity bill  based on the energy 
consumed and the per-unit cost of electricity , helping users predict their 
upcoming charges. 
 
4. Displaying Real-Time Data 
i. The 16x2 I2C LCD display  presents the real-time voltage, current, power 
consumption, and total energy usage. 
ii. Users can quickly check their power usage without needing additional software 
or applications. 
 
5. Load Control Mechanism 
i. A 4-channel relay module is used to control individual electrical appliances. 
ii. Users can manually turn ON/OFF loads by pressing physical switches or using 
a predefined control mechanism. 
iii. This feature helps in optimizing energy consumption , preventing power 
wastage, and improving electrical safety. 
 
6. Fault Detection and Safety Features SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
34  
i. The system continuously checks for high voltage conditions (>250V)  and 
unusual power consumption patterns. 
ii. If an abnormal condition is detected, the user is alerted via the LCD display, 
and the system can trigger automatic load disconnection if necessary. 
iii. The relays can be programmed  to disconnect loads during overvoltage or 
excessive current draw, preventing damage to appliances. 
 
7. User Interaction and System Control 
i. The user can monitor real-time readings and control the appliances manually. 
ii. The predictive bill analysis  feature allows users to estimate their energy 
expenses and take necessary actions to reduce costs. 
The working procedure of the smart energy meter  is structured to  provide efficient, 
real-time energy monitoring and control . By integrating PZEM-004T for total load 
measurement, ACS712 for individual loads , and relays for automation , the system 
offers a complete energy management solution. 
This automated energy monitor ing system  helps users make informed decisions, 
leading to energy savings, cost reduction, and improved electrical safety. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        Fig. Flow chart of proposed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
36  
 
 
 
4.5 DESIGN PROCEDURE 
The hardware components of a smart energy meter play a crucial role in 
ensuring accurate energy measurement, efficient control, and reliable communication. 
This chapter provides a detailed analysis of the major hardware components used in the 
system, including their working principles, features, and interfacing with the ESP32 
microcontroller. The components include energy measurement sensors, 
communication interfaces, display modules, and power supply circuits. By integrating 
these hardwar e elements, the smart energy meter provides real -time monitoring, 
predictive bill analysis, and efficient energy management 
 
4.6 HARDWARE COMPONENTS 
The smart energy meter system consists of various hardware components that work 
together to measure, displa y, and control energy consumption. These components 
include: 
1. ESP32 Microcontroller  – The core processing unit for data acquisition and 
communication. 
2. PZEM-004T Energy Meter  – Measures voltage, current, power, and energy 
consumption. 
3. ACS712 Current Sensors (x3) – Measure the individual load currents. 
4. 4-Channel Relay Module – Controls individual load switching. 
5. DHT11 Sensor – Monitors temperature and humidity. 
6. 16x2 I2C LCD Display  – Displays real -time readings and energy 
consumption. 
7. Power Supply Unit – Provides stable voltage levels for different components. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
37  
Each component is selected based on its accuracy, efficiency, and compatibility with 
the ESP32 microcontroller to ensure seamless integration into the system. The 
following sections describe these components in detail. 
 
  4.7 DESCRIPTION OF MAJOR COMPONENTS 
 
   4.7.1 ESP 32 MICROCONTROLLER 
The ESP32 is a powerful microcontroller with built -in Wi -Fi and Bluetooth 
capabilities, making it ideal for IoT  applications such as smart energy meters. It serves 
as the central processing unit, handling data collection, communication, and control 
tasks. 
4.7.1.1 Features and Specifications 
1. Single or Dual -Core 32 -bit LX6 Microprocessor with clock frequency up to 
240 MHz. 
2. 520 KB of SRAM, 448 KB of ROM and 16 KB of RTC SRAM. 
3. Supports 802.11 b/g/n Wi-Fi connectivity with speeds up to 150 Mbps. 
4. Support for both Classic Bluetooth v4.2 and BLE specifications. 
5. 34 Programmable GPIOs. 
6. Up to 18 channels of 12-bit SAR ADC and 2 channels of 8-bit DAC 
7. Serial Connectivity include 4 x SPI, 2 x I2C, 2 x I2S, 3 x UART. 
8. Ethernet MAC for physical LAN Communication (requires external PHY). 
9. 1 Host controller for SD/SDIO/MMC and 1 Slave controller for SDIO/SPI. 
10. Motor PWM and up to 16-channels of LED PWM. 
11. Secure Boot and Flash Encryption. 
12. Cryptographic Hardware Acceleration for AES, Hash (SHA -2), RSA, ECC and 
RNG. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
38  
 
Fig. 4.1 ESP32 
4.7.1.2 GPIO Pin Configuration 
The ESP32 features multiple General-Purpose Input/output (GPIO) pins, which can be 
configured for different functionalities, including: 
1. Digital Input/ Output – Used for controlling relays and reading sensor data. 
2. Analog Input – Reads analog signals from sensors like ACS712. 
3. PWM Output – Controls dimmable loads like LEDs. 
4. Interrupts – Handles real-time responses for event-driven operations 
. 
 
Fig. 4.2 ESP32 Pinout diagram 
4.7.1.3 Communication Interfaces (I2C, UART, Wi-Fi) 
The ESP32 supports multiple communication interfaces: 
1. I2C (Inter-Integrated Circuit) – Used for interfacing with the LCD display 
and sensors. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
39  
2. UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver -Transmitter) – Communicates 
with the PZEM-004T energy meter. 
3. Wi-Fi – Connects the system to a cloud-based platform for remote monitoring. 
4. Bluetooth – Enables local wireless communication when needed. 
4.7.1.4 Role in the Energy Meter System 
The ESP32 microcontroller plays a crucial role in the smart energy meter system by: 
1. Collecting real-time energy data from PZEM-004T and ACS712 sensors. 
2. Processing and analyzing power consumption to generate insights. 
3. Controlling relays to manage electrical loads efficiently. 
4. Displaying information on the 16x2 LCD via I2C communication. 
5. Sending alerts and reports  through Wi -Fi connectivity to the cloud or a 
mobile application. 
4.7.2 PZEM-004T Energy Meter 
 
4.7.2.1 Working Principle 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
40  
The PZEM -004T energy meter is a highly efficient module designed for measuring 
electrical parameters such as voltage, current, power,  and energy consumption. It 
operates based on the principle of direct electrical measurement using an internal 
microcontroller and a current transformer. The module continuously monitors the 
electrical characteristics of an AC circuit and provides accurate  readings via a digital 
communication interface. 
4.7.2.2 Electrical Parameters 
The key electrical parameters measured by the PZEM-004T energy meter include: 
1. Voltage: 80–260V, 0.1V resolution, 0.5% accuracy 
2. Current: 0–10A (10A model), 0 –100A (100A model), 0 .001A resolution, 0.5% 
accuracy 
3. Active Power:  0–2.3kW (10A model), 0 –23kW (100A model), 0.1W 
resolution, 0.5% accuracy 
4. Power Factor: 0.00–1.00, 0.01 resolution, 1% accuracy 
5. Frequency: 45–65Hz, 0.1Hz resolution, 0.5% accuracy 
6. Active Energy: 0–9999.99kWh, 1Wh resolution, 0.5% accuracy, resettable via 
software 
7. Over Power Alarm: Settable threshold, triggers alarm on exceedance 
8. Communication: RS485 (UART to RS485), 9600 baud, 8N1 
    
Fig. 4.4 PZEM-004T Sensor 
 
4.7.2.3 Connection with ESP32 
The PZEM-004T module interfaces with the ESP32 microcontroller to transmit energy 
data for further processing. The connection is established using: 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
41  
A voltage input connection (L and N) to measure the line voltage. 
A current transformer (CT) placed around the live wire to measure current flow. 
UART communication lines (TX and RX) to send data to the ESP32 
  
 
Fig. 4.5 PZEM-004T Connection Pinout 
 
4.7.2.4 Communication Protocol (UART) 
The PZEM-004T module communicates with the ESP32 using the UART (Universal 
Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter) protocol. The UART interface allows: 
1. Asynchronous Serial Communication  – Ensures reliable data transmission 
without requiring clock synchronization. 
2. Full-Duplex Data Exchange – Enables simultaneous sending and receiving of 
energy data. 
3. Baud R ate Configuration  – Typically set at 9600 bps  for stable data 
transmission. 
Data from the PZEM -004T is read using standard serial communication commands, 
allowing the ESP32 to process and display energy consumption details in real time. 
4.7.3 ACS712 Current Sensor 
 
4.7.3.1 Overview of ACS712 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
42  
The ACS712 is a Hall -effect-based current sensor that provides accurate and linear 
measurements of AC and DC currents. It operates by detecting the magnetic field 
generated by current flow and converting it into a proportional voltage output. 
FEATURES AND BENEFITS 
1.  Low-noise analog signal path  
2.  Device bandwidth is set via the new FILTER pin  
3.  5 µs output rise time in response to step input current  
4.  80 kHz bandwidth 
5.  Total output error 1.5% at TA= 25°C  
6.  Small footprint, low-profile SOIC-8 package 
7.  1.2 mΩ internal conductor resistance  
8.  2.4 kVRMS minimum isolation voltage from pins 1-4 to pins 5-8 
9.  5.0 V, single supply operation  
10.  66 to 185 mV/A output sensitivity  
11.  Output voltage proportional to AC or DC currents  
12.  Factory-trimmed for accuracy  
13.  Extremely stable output offset voltage  
14.  Nearly zero magnetic hysteresis  
15.  Ratio metric output from supply voltage 
4.7.3.2 Measuring Individual Loads 
Each ACS712 sensor is used to measure the current consumption o f individual 
electrical loads. By placing the sensor in series with the load, it captures the real -time 
current flow, which is then processed by the ESP32. 
4.7.3.3 Sensitivity and Output Voltage Relation 
The ACS712 is available in different current ratings  (5A, 20A, 30A), each with a 
different sensitivity: 
1. 5A version: 185 mV/A 
2. 20A version: 100 mV/A 
3. 30A version: 66 mV/A 
The output voltage is centred  around 2.5V at zero current and varies proportionally 
based on the measured current. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
43  
                   
Fig. 4.7 Different ampere rating current sensors 
4.7.3.4 Interfacing with ESP32 
The ACS712 output is connected to an analog input pin of the ESP32. The ESP32 
reads the sensor's voltage output, converts it into a current value, and uses it for further 
energy calculations. 
 
Fig. 4.8 Pinout and interface of ACS-712 current sensor 
4.7.3.5 Calculation of Current and Power 
The measured current is determined using:  
Power consumption is calculated as:  
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
44  
where V is the voltage measured by the PZEM -004T module and I is the current from 
ACS712. 
 
4.7.4  4-Channel Relay Module 
The 4-channel relay module  is a crucial component in the Smart Energy Meter  
project, enabling the control of individual electrical loads remotely. This module 
operates as an electrically operated switch, allowing the ESP32 microcontroller to turn 
appliances on or off based on predefined conditions. The integration of relays in th e 
system enhances automation, energy efficiency, and safety by preventing excessive 
energy consumption. 
 
Fig. 4.9 4-channel relay module 
4.7.4.1 Relay Module Working Principle 
A relay is an electromechanical switch that uses an electromagnetic coil to con trol a 
mechanical switch. When a small input voltage is applied to the relay coil, it generates 
a magnetic field that pulls a mechanical lever, changing the state of the switch. The 4 -
channel relay module consists of four independent relays, each capable o f handling 
high-voltage loads. It provides electrical isolation between the low -power control 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
45  
circuit (ESP32) and high-power appliances, ensuring safe operation. 
Each relay has three terminals: 
1. Common (COM): The main terminal that connects to either Normally Open 
(NO) or Normally Closed (NC). 
2. Normally Open (NO) : When the relay is inactive, there is no connection. 
When activated, it connects to COM, allowing current to flow. 
3. Normally Closed (NC) : When the relay is inactive, this terminal is connected 
to COM. When activated, it disconnects. 
 
Fig. 4.10 Pinout of relay Module 
In this project, the NO configuration is used, meaning that the appliances remain off by 
default and turn on only when the relay is triggered. 
As we may know, relay is a device which is used to provide connection between two 
or more points or devices in response to the input signal applied. In other words, relays 
provide isolation between the controller and the device as devices may work  on AC a s 
well as on DC. However, they receive signals from a micro -controller which works on 
DC hence requiring a relay to bridge the gap. Relay is extremely useful when you need 
to control a large amount of current or voltage with small electrical signal. There are 5 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
46  
parts in every relay 
Electromagnet - It consists of an iron core wounded by coil of wires. When electricity 
is passed through, it becomes magnetic. Therefore, it is called electromagnet.  
Armature - The movable magnetic strip is known as armature. W hen current flows 
through them, the coil is it energized thus producing a magnetic field which is used to 
make or break the normally open (N/O) or normally close(N/C)points. And the 
armature can be moved with direct current (DC) as well as alternating curr ent (AC).  
Spring - When no currents flow through the coil on the electromagnet, the spring pulls 
the armature away so the circuit cannot be completed. Set of electrical contacts - There 
are two contact points: Normally open - connected when the relay is activated, and 
disconnected when it is inactive. 
Normally close - not connected when the relay is activated, and connected when it is 
inactive.  Molded frame - Relays are covered with plastic for protection. The working 
principle of relay is simple. When power is supplied to the relay, currents start flowing 
through the control coil; as a result, the electromagnet starts energizing. Then the 
armature is attracted to the coil, pulling down the moving contact together thus 
connecting with the normally open c ontacts. So the circuit with the load is energized. 
Then breaking the circuit would a similar case, as the moving contact will be pulled up 
to the normally closed contacts under the force of the spring. In this way, the switching 
on and off of the relay can control the state of a load circuit. 
4.7.4.2 Operating Voltages and Currents 
The 4-channel relay module operates at: 
1. Control voltage: 5V (provided by the ESP32 using a level shifter, as ESP32 
operates at 3.3V) 
2. Operating current: Approximately 70mA per relay 
3. Load capacity: 250V AC at 10A or 30V DC at 10A per relay 
4. Trigger voltage: Low-level trigger (0V activates the relay) 
Since the ESP32 operates at 3.3V logic and the relay module requires 5V signals, a 
transistor or level shifter is used to ensure proper switching. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
47  
4.7.4.3 Controlling of Individual Loads 
Each relay in the 4-channel relay module  is assigned to control an individual load, 
such as bulbs and sockets. The relays are programmed to switch loads on or off based 
on various factors, including: 
1. User commands via Blynk  
2. Predefined energy consumption thresholds 
3. Scheduled automation 
4. Overload protection mechanisms 
The ESP32 microcontroller processes the real -time energy data from the PZEM-004T 
and ACS712 sensors . If any predefined energy consumption limit is exceeded, the 
corresponding relay is turned off to prevent excessive usage. This automation helps in 
energy conservation and prevents electrical hazards. 
4.7.4.4 Interfacing with ESP32 
The 4-channel relay module  is interfaced with the ESP32 using GPIO pins. The 
connections are as follows: 
VCC (Relay Module) → 5V (External Power Source) 
GND (Relay Module) → GND (ESP32) 
IN1, IN2, IN3, IN4 (Relay Module) → ESP32 GPIO Pins 
Since the ESP32 operates at 3.3V and the relay module requires 5V, a level shift er or 
transistor-based switching circuit is used to ensure proper activation. The relay control 
logic in the ESP32 is programmed as follows: 
Digital LOW (0V) → Relay ON (Appliance ON) 
Digital HIGH (3.3V) → Relay OFF (Appliance OFF) 
4.3.5 DHT11 Temperature Sensor 
The DHT11 is a digital temperature and humidity sensor used in the Smart Energy SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
48  
Meter project to monitor environmental conditions. It provides real -time temperature 
and humidity readings, which can be utilized for optimizing energy consumption and 
enhancing safety. The sensor is known for its low power consumption, cost -
effectiveness, and ease of interfacing with microcontrollers like the ESP32. 
4.7.5.1 Features and Specifications 
The DHT11 sensor integrates a resistive humidity sensor and an NTC (Ne gative 
Temperature Coefficient) temperature sensor to measure atmospheric conditions 
accurately. The key features and specifications of the DHT11 are: 
1. Operating Voltage: 3.3V to 5V 
2. Temperature Range: 0°C to 50°C (±2°C accuracy) 
3. Humidity Range: 20% to 90% RH (±5% accuracy) 
4. Sampling Rate: 1 reading per second (1Hz) 
5. Response time : 6s-15s 
6. Data Interface: Single-wire digital signal 
7. Power Consumption: 2.5mA max during data transmission 
The DHT11 operates with a one-wire communication protocol, requiring only a single 
data line for communication with the ESP32, making it easy to interface with minimal 
wiring. 
4.7.5.2 Temperature and Humidity Sensing 
The DHT11 sensor measures: 
1. Temperature using a thermistor that changes resistance based on tempe rature 
variations. 
2. Humidity using a capacitive humidity sensor, where the capacitance varies with 
the moisture level in the surrounding air. 
The sensor collects data and transmits it as a digital signal to the ESP32, ensuring 
precise readings with minimal noise. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
49  
 
 
Fig. 4.11 DHT11 Sensor working 
Use in Smart Energy Meter 
In this project, the DHT11 sensor enhances energy efficiency by: 
1. Monitoring ambient temperature to optimize appliance usage. 
2. Providing real -time humidity data , which can be displayed on the LCD and 
monitored remotely. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
50  
3. Triggering alerts for extreme temperature conditions , helping to prevent 
overheating or electrical hazards. 
4.7.5.3 Connection and Data from ESP32 
 DHT11 Pinout consists of 4 Pins in total, listed below from left to right: 
1. VCC: Need to provide +5V at this pinout. 
2. Data: It's the digital output pin, that gives either 0V or 5V. 
3. NC: Not Connected. (It's left open for future design) 
4. GND: Need to provide Ground at this pinout. 
 
Fig.4.12 DHT11 Pinout 
                
 
Fig.4.13 DHT 11 Sensor 
 
 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
51  
 
 
 
4.7.6 16x2 I2C LCD Display 
The 16x2 I2C LCD Display  is used in the Smart Energy Meter  project to display 
real-time energy consumption data, temperature, humidity, and system alerts. The I2C 
(Inter-Integrated Circuit) communication interface allows easy integration with the 
ESP32 using only two data lines, reducing wiring complexity compared to traditional 
parallel LCD displays. 
 
Fig.4.14 16x2 LCD Display with I2C 
4.7.6.1 LCD Display Specifications 
The 16x2 LCD is a character display module that can show two lines of 16 characters 
each. With the I2C module (PCF8574 IC) , the display operates efficiently with 
minimal GPIO usage. The key specifications are: 
 Display Type: 16x2 character LCD 
 Controller IC: HD44780 
 Interface: I2C (via PCF8574 IC) 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
52  
 Operating Voltage: 5V 
 Backlight: LED (usually blue with white text) 
 Contrast Adjustment: Potentiometer on the I2C adapter 
4.7.6.2 I2C Communication Protocol 
I2C (Inter -Integrated Circuit)  is a two-wire serial communication protocol  that 
allows multiple devices to communicate over a shared data bus. The ESP32 
communicates with the 16x2 I2C LCD using the following two lines: 
 SDA (Serial Data Line) → Transmits data 
 SCL (Serial Clock Line) → Synchronizes communication 
 
Fig. 4.15 LCD Pinout 
I2C Address 
Each I2C device has a unique 7-bit address . The 16x2 I2C LCD module  usually 
operates at one of the following addresses: 
 0x27 (Default) 
 0x3F (Alternative) 
If multiple I2C devices are connected, an I2C scanner code can be used to detect the 
exact address. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
53  
 
 
 
4.7.6.3 Interfacing with ESP32 
The 16x2 I2C LCD is connected to the ESP32 using only four wires: 
LCD Pin Function ESP32 Connection 
VCC Power (5V) 5V (ESP32) 
GND Ground GND (ESP32) 
SDA Data Line GPIO21 (ESP32 SDA) 
SCL Clock Line GPIO22 (ESP32 SCL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.16 LCD Interfacing with ESP32 
 
 
 
4.7.7 Power Supply 
The power supply unit  in the Smart Energy Meter  project is responsible for 
providing stable 5V and 3.3V  power to the ESP32, sensors, relays, and display 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
54  
modules. The system uses a regulated power supply circuit  to ensure smooth 
operation and prevent voltage fluctuations. 
 
4.7.7.1 Power Requirements for ESP32 
The ESP32 is the main microcontroller in the project and operates at 3.3V. It requires 
a stable power supply to function properly, especially during Wi -Fi communication, 
which can cause voltage spikes. 
 Operating Voltage: 3.3V 
 Current Consumption: 
o Idle Mode: ~80mA 
o Wi-Fi Active: 250mA - 500mA 
o Peak Consumption: ~1A (during transmission bursts) 
 Power Input Options: 
o Micro-USB (5V input)  → Uses the onboard AMS1117-3.3V 
regulator 
o VIN Pin (5V input) → Direct 5V supply from the external regulator 
o 3.3V Pin → Direct 3.3V regulated supply 
To ensure stability, a capacitor (10µF or higher) is recommended across the ESP32’s 
power pins. 
 
4.7.7.2 5V and 3.3V Voltage Regulation 
Since different components in the project require either 5V or 3.3V , a proper voltage 
regulation system is implemented. 
 5V Supply: 
o Used for Relay Module, LCD Display, and Sensors 
o Generated using a 5V adapter (2A recommended) 
 3.3V Supply: 
o Used for the ESP32, ACS712 Current Sensors, and DHT11 
Temperature Sensor SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
55  
o Regulated using an AMS1117-3.3V voltage regulator 
       
Fig. 4.17 ESP32 Power Supply 
Voltage Regulators Used 
1. AMS1117-3.3V Regulator (For ESP32) 
o Input Voltage: 5V 
o Output Voltage: 3.3V 
o Max Current Output: 800mA 
o Capacitors Used: 10µF (input) & 10µF (output) 
2. 5V Power Supply Module (For Relays & Display) 
o Converts AC mains (230V) to stable 5V DC 
o Provides enough current for relays and LCD 
This dual voltage regulation ensures the safe operation of all components without 
overloading the ESP32. 
 
4.7.7.3 Power Supply Circuit Design 
Based on the circuit diagram, the power supply circuit  consists of a 5V adapter , 
voltage regulators, and necessary filtering capacitors. 
Power Supply Connections in the Circuit: 
 5V Adapter → Powers the Relay Module, LCD Display, and ACS712 Sensors 
 AMS1117-3.3V Regulator → Converts 5V to 3.3V for ESP32 and DHT11 
 Filtering Capacitors → Reduce voltage fluctuations and noise 
 Schottky Diode (1N4007) → Prevents reverse polarity damage 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
56  
Component Voltage Requirement Power Source 
ESP32 3.3V AMS1117-3.3V 
Relay Module 5V 5V Adapter 
LCD Display 5V 5V Adapter 
ACS712 Sensors 5V 5V Adapter 
DHT11 Sensor 3.3V ESP32 (3.3V Pin) 
Power Supply Circuit Overview 
 The 5V adapter provides power to relays, LCD, and sensors. 
 The AMS1117-3.3V regulator steps 5V down to 3.3V for the ESP32. 
 Capacitors (10µF and 100µF) stabilize the voltage to prevent fluctuations. 
 The ESP32 can be powered via its 5V pin (from the external adapter) or 
3.3V pin (from AMS1117). 
This regulated power supply design  ensures that all components receiv e the required 
voltage levels safely, avoiding power surges and instability. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.18 Different types of power supply to ESP32
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
57  
 
 
4.8    SOFTWARE TOOLS 
ESP32 with Arduino IDE 
                                                       
To program your boards, you need an IDE to write your code. For beginners, we 
recommend using Arduino IDE. While it’s not the best IDE, it works well and is 
simple and intuitive to use for beginners. After getting familiar with Arduino IDE and 
you start creating more complex projects, you may find it useful to use  VS Code with 
the Platformio extension instead. 
If you’re just getting started with the ESP32, start with Arduino IDE. 
Installing Arduino IDE 
To run Arduino IDE, you need to install J AVA on your computer. If you don’t, go to 
the following website to download and install the latest 
version: http://java.com/download. 
Downloading and Installing Arduino IDE 
To download the Arduino IDE, visit the following URL: 
 https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/Software 
Go to the Arduino website and download the version for your operating system. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.19    Arduino Ide 2.3.2 version download 
 Windows: run the file downloaded and follow the instructions in the 
installation guide. 
 Mac OS X: copy the downloaded file into your application folder. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
58  
 Linux: extract the downloaded file, and open the  arduino-ide file that will 
launch the IDE. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.20  Settingup the Arduino 
 
If you have doubts, you can go to the Arduino Installation Guide. 
Do you need an ESP32 board? You can buy it here. 
Recommended reading: ESP32 Development Boards Review and Comparison 
Installing the ESP32 in Arduino IDE 
To install the ESP32 board in your Arduino IDE, follow these next instructions: 
1. In your Arduino IDE 2, go to File > Preferences. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.21 Selecting the Preferences 
 
2. Copy and paste the following line to the Additional Boards Manager URLs field. 
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/gh-
pages/package_esp32_index.json                                                                                                 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
59  
 
 
Note: if you already have the ESP8266 boards URL, you can separate the URLs with a 
comma, as follows: 
 
http://arduino.esp8266.com/stable/package_esp8266com_index.json , 
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/gh-
pages/package_esp32_index.json  
 
3. Open the Boards Manager. You can go to  Tools > Board > Boards Manager… or 
you can simply click the Boards Manager icon in the left-side corner. 
 
 
Fig. 4.22. opening Board manager 
4. Search for  ESP32 and press the install button for  esp32 by Espressif Systems 
version 3.X. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
60  
 
 
Fig.4.23 Select necessary boards in Board manager 
 
That’s it. It should be installed after a few seconds. 
After this, restart your Arduino IDE. 
Then, go to Tools > Board and check that you have ESP32 boards available. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.24  Select the ESP32 board in tools 
 
 
Now, you’re ready to start programming your ESP32 using Arduino IDE. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
61  
Testing the Installation and Uploading Code to the ESP32 
Now, let’s check if the installation was successful and if we can upload new code to 
the ESP32 board. 
We’ll simply upload an example sketch from the library of available examples. 
Connect your ESP32 development board to your computer using a USB cable. If you 
have an ESP32 DEVKIT DOIT board, the built-in red LED will turn on. This indicates 
the board is receiving power. 
Important: you must use a USB cable with data wires. Some USB cables from 
chargers or power banks are power only and they don’t transfer da ta—these won’t 
work. 
With your Arduino IDE open, follow these steps: 
1) Select your Board in  Tools > Board menu or on the top drop -down menu, click on 
“Select other board and port…“ 
 
 
Fig.4.25 Select the Board and Port 
 
A new window, as shown below, will open. Search for your ESP32 board model. 
 
Fig.4.26 Selecting the ESP32 DEVKIT V1 in Board and Port 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
62  
Select the board model you’re using, and the COM port. In our example, we’re using 
the DOIT ESP32 DEVKIT V1. Click OK when you’re done. 
 
Installing the USB Drivers 
If you don’t see the COM Port in your Arduino IDE, you probably need to install the 
USB-to-UART drivers on your computer. Most ESP32 boards use either the CP210x 
or the CH340 chip depending on the board you’re using.  
If you need to install the C P210x drivers, we recommend taking a look at this 
tutorial: Install ESP32/ESP8266 USB Drivers – CP210x USB to UART Bridge 
 
2) Open the following example — it searches for wi -fi networks within the range of 
your board. 
 ESP32: File > Examples > WiFi (ESP32) > WiFiScan 
3) A new sketch opens in your Arduino IDE: 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.27  Writing a code 
 
4) Press the  Upload button in the Arduino  IDE. Wait a few seconds while the code 
compiles and uploads to your board. 
 
Note: if you see a lot of dots on the debugging window, followed by an upload error, 
that means your board doesn’t go into flashing mode automatically. Click the Upload 
button again, and when you start seeing the dots on the debugging window, press the 
onboard BOOT button for a couple of seconds. 
 
5) If everything went as expected, it will upload successfully after a few seconds. 
You’ll get a similar message: 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
63  
 
 
Fig.4.28  Successfully uploaded the code to ESP32 
 
6) Open the Arduino IDE Serial Monitor at a baud rate of 115200: 
 
7) Press the ESP32 on -board Enable/RESET button and you should see the networks 
available near your board. 
 
Fig. 4.29 Serial Monitor 
 
If you’re having issues uploading code to your ESP32 board, we recommend taking a 
quick look at the following troubleshooting guide: ESP32 Troubleshooting Guide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
64  
 
4.9 Blynk Application 
 
Blynk Setup for Smart Energy Meter 
 
Introduction 
In this Smart Energy Meter project, the Blynk IoT platform is used to enable remote 
monitoring and control of the system through a smartphone. Blynk provides an 
intuitive and user-friendly interface that allows users to monitor real-time voltage, 
current, power, energy consumption, and temperature while also controlling 
connected electrical loads (relays) wirelessly. 
 
Objective of Blynk Integration 
The main objectives of integrating Blynk into the Smart Energy Meter are: 
 To monitor energy parameters remotely and in real-time. 
 To control electrical loads from a mobile device. 
 To improve user convenience and energy efficiency. 
 To provide a scalable and reliable IoT-based solution. 
 
Blynk Setup Procedure 
1. Installation of Blynk Application 
 Download the Blynk IoT App from the Google Play Store (for Android) or 
the Apple App Store (for iOS devices). 
 Install and open the application on the mobile device. 
 Sign up for a new account using an email address or log in if an account 
already exists. 
 
2. Creation of a New Blynk Project 
 Tap on “New Project” in the Blynk app. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
65  
 Set a Project Name such as Smart Energy Meter. 
 Select Device Type: Choose ESP32. 
 Set the Connection Type: Select Wi-Fi. 
 Tap Create. 
 A unique Auth Token will be generated and sent to the registered email. This 
Auth Token is essential for connecting the ESP32 to Blynk Cloud. 
 
3. Designing the Blynk Mobile Dashboard 
To create an effective monitoring and control dashboard, the following widgets must 
be added: 
Widget Purpose 
Virtual Pin 
Assignment 
Gauge Display Voltage V1 
Gauge Display Current V2 
Gauge Display Power V3 
Gauge Display Energy Consumption (kWh) V4 
Gauge Display Temperature V5 
Button Control Load 1 (Relay 1) V10 
Button Control Load 2 (Relay 2) V11 
Button Control Load 3 (Relay 3) V12 
Button Control Load 4 (Relay 4) V13 
Widget Settings: 
 Gauges: Configure min-max values based on expected sensor ranges (e.g., 0–
250V for voltage, 0–30A for current). 
 Buttons: Set to “Switch” mode for toggling loads ON or OFF. 
Each widget is mapped to a Virtual Pin that links the mobile app controls to the 
ESP32 microcontroller actions. SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
66  
 
4. Connecting ESP32 to Blynk Cloud 
 The ESP32 microcontroller is programmed using the Arduino IDE. 
 The Auth Token, Wi-Fi SSID, and Wi-Fi Password must be entered in the 
program code. 
 Blynk library functions are used to send sensor data to virtual pins and read 
button commands to operate relays. 
5. Uploading and Testing the System 
 After uploading the firmware to ESP32, the board connects to the local Wi-Fi 
network and then to the Blynk Cloud. 
 The Blynk mobile app dashboard can now display real-time sensor values and 
control relay outputs. 
 Users can observe live voltage, current, power, energy consumption, and 
temperature readings. 
 Loads can be switched ON or OFF remotely by tapping the buttons on the 
mobile screen. 
 
Advantages of Blynk Integration 
 Real-Time Monitoring: Immediate visibility of power usage and 
environmental conditions. 
 Remote Load Control: Devices can be controlled from anywhere in the world 
using a smartphone. 
 User-Friendly Interface: Simple and visually appealing dashboard setup 
without complex coding. 
 Scalable and Flexible: Additional loads, sensors, or alerts can be added easily 
by modifying the app layout and code. 
 Enhanced Energy Management: Enables users to track energy consumption 
and control devices, leading to better energy efficiency and cost savings. 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
67  
Conclusion 
The integration of the Blynk platform with the Smart Energy Meter system provides 
users with a powerful and convenient tool for managing energy usage. Through a 
combination of real-time data acquisition, wireless control, and an intuitive mobile 
interface, Blynk significantly enhances the functionality and usability of the energy 
monitoring system. 
This seamless integration brings the benefits of IoT technology into everyday life, 
promoting smarter and more sustainable energy consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
68  
ThingSpeak 
Go to ThingSpeak an click the “Get Started For Free” button to create a new account. 
This account is linked to a Mathworks account. So, if you already have a Mathworks 
account, you should log in with that account. 
Creating New Channel 
After your account is ready, sign in, open the “ Channels” tab an d select “ My 
Channels“. 
 
 
Fig. 5.12 Creating Channel in Thingspeak 
 
Press the “New Channel” button to create a new channel. 
 
Type a name for your channel and add a description. In this example, we’ll just publish 
temperature. If you want to publish multiple readings (like humidity and pressure), you 
can enable more fields as you’ll see later in this tutorial. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
69  
 
 
Fig.5.13 Adding the Fields 
 
Click the Save Channel button to create and save your channel. 
 
Customizing Chart 
The chart can be customized, go to your Private View tab and click on the edit icon. 
 
Fig .5.14 Creating the Channel Stats 
You can give a title to your chart, customize the background color, x and y axis, and 
much more. 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
70  
 
 
Fig 5.15 Customize the Chart Options 
 
When you’re done, press the “Save” button. 
API Key 
To send values from the ESP32 to ThingSpeak, you need the Write API Key. Open the 
“API Keys” 
tab and copy the Write API Key to a safe place because you’ll need it in a moment. 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5.17 API key of Thingspeak 
Go to "Data Import/Export" 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
71  
 On your channel page, find and click on the "Data Import/Export"  option 
(usually under the channel settings). 
Select Export Options 
 Choose either: 
o "Export recent data" (for the latest entries). 
o "Export all data" (for the entire dataset). 
Download as Excel (CSV/XLSX) 
 Select CSV/XLSX as the file format. 
 Click Download, and your Excel file will be saved to your computer. 
 
 
Fig. 5.18 Downloading the Excel Sheet contains data 
 
Fig.5.19 Downloaded Excel Sheet 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
72  
 
5.1 Project Codes 
In this project we are describe entire project code, 
 
#define BLYNK_TEMPLATE_ID "TMPL6mm0IsdC8" 
#define BLYNK_TEMPLATE_NAME "Energy Meter With Home Automation" 
#define BLYNK_AUTH_TOKEN "RFOIahTNiBIxsmlfPhWRKRPWK-K7bWmH" 
 
#include <Arduino.h> 
#include <Wire.h> 
#include <LiquidCrystal_I2C.h> 
#include <PZEM004Tv30.h> 
#include <ACS712.h> 
#include <WiFi.h> 
#include <BlynkSimpleEsp32.h> 
#include <HTTPClient.h> 
 
// WiFi and Blynk credentials 
char ssid[] = "Jaswaanth"; 
char pass[] = "7995533479"; 
 
// ThingSpeak API Key 
String apiKey = "YQD5OMU0GJOGT8LS"; 
 
// Sensors and modules 
PZEM004Tv30 pzem(Serial2, 16, 17); // RX, TX for ESP32 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
73  
ACS712 acs1(34, 3.3, 4095, 100); 
ACS712 acs2(35, 3.3, 4095, 100); 
ACS712 acs3(32, 3.3, 4095, 100); 
ACS712 acs4(33, 3.3, 4095, 100); 
LiquidCrystal_I2C lcd(0x27, 16, 2); 
 
// Calibration factor for ACS712 
int calibration_factor = 126; 
 
// Relays 
#define RELAY1 25 
#define RELAY2 26 
#define RELAY3 27 
#define RELAY4 14 
 
// Tariff per kWh 
#define TARIFF 7.5 
 
// Energy Consumption (Total over time) 
float totalEnergyLoad1 = 0; 
float totalEnergyLoad2 = 0; 
float totalEnergyLoad3 = 0; 
float totalEnergyLoad4 = 0; 
 
// Relay Control via Blynk SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
74  
BLYNK_WRITE(V11) { digitalWrite(RELAY1, param.asInt()); } 
BLYNK_WRITE(V12) { digitalWrite(RELAY2, param.asInt()); } 
BLYNK_WRITE(V13) { digitalWrite(RELAY3, param.asInt()); } 
BLYNK_WRITE(V14) { digitalWrite(RELAY4, param.asInt()); } 
 
void setup() { 
    Serial.begin(115200); 
    WiFi.begin(ssid, pass); 
    while (WiFi.status() != WL_CONNECTED) { 
        delay(1000); 
        Serial.println("Connecting to WiFi..."); 
    } 
    Serial.println("WiFi Connected!"); 
 
    Blynk.begin(BLYNK_AUTH_TOKEN, ssid, pass); 
 
    lcd.init(); 
    lcd.backlight(); 
 
    pinMode(RELAY1, OUTPUT); 
    pinMode(RELAY2, OUTPUT); 
    pinMode(RELAY3, OUTPUT); 
    pinMode(RELAY4, OUTPUT); 
 
    digitalWrite(RELAY1, LOW); SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
75  
    digitalWrite(RELAY2, LOW); 
    digitalWrite(RELAY3, LOW); 
    digitalWrite(RELAY4, LOW); 
} 
 
// Function to read AC current 
float readCalibratedCurrent(ACS712 &sensor) { 
    float average = 0; 
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i++) { 
        average += sensor.mA_AC(); 
    } 
    float mA = (abs(average / 100.0) - calibration_factor); 
    if (mA <= 1) mA = 0; 
    return mA / 1000.0; // Convert to Amps 
} 
 
void sendToThingSpeak (float voltage, float current, float power, float energy, float 
totalBill, float billLoad1, float billLoad2, float billLoad3) { 
    if (WiFi.status() == WL_CONNECTED) { 
        HTTPClient http; 
        String url = "http://api.thingspeak.com/update?api_key=" + apiKey + 
                     "&field1=" + String(voltage) + 
                     "&field2=" + String(current) + 
                     "&field3=" + String(power) + 
                     "&field4=" + String(energy) + SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
76  
                     "&field5=" + String(totalBill) + 
                     "&field6=" + String(billLoad1) + 
                     "&field7=" + String(billLoad2) + 
                     "&field8=" + String(billLoad3); 
         
        http.begin(url); 
        int httpResponseCode = http.GET(); 
        if (httpResponseCode > 0) { 
            Serial.println("Data sent to ThingSpeak successfully."); 
        } else { 
            Serial.print("Error sending data: "); 
            Serial.println(httpResponseCode); 
        } 
        http.end(); 
    } 
} 
 
void loop() { 
    Blynk.run(); 
 
    float voltage = pzem.voltage(); 
    float current = pzem.current(); 
    float power = pzem.power(); 
    float energy = pzem.energy(); // Total energy from PZEM 
    float frequency = pzem.frequency(); SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
77  
    float pf = pzem.pf(); 
 
    float currentLoad1 = readCalibratedCurrent(acs1); 
    float currentLoad2 = readCalibratedCurrent(acs2); 
    float currentLoad3 = readCalibratedCurrent(acs3); 
    float currentLoad4 = readCalibratedCurrent(acs4); 
    float totalCurrent = currentLoad1 + currentLoad2 + currentLoad3 + currentLoad4; 
 
    // Power for each load (P = V * I) 
    float powerLoad1 = voltage * currentLoad1; 
    float powerLoad2 = voltage * currentLoad2; 
    float powerLoad3 = voltage * currentLoad3; 
    float powerLoad4 = voltage * currentLoad4; 
 
    // Energy per load in 5s interval (E = P * t, with t in hours) 
    float energyLoad1 = (powerLoad1 * 5) / (1000 * 3600); 
    float energyLoad2 = (powerLoad2 * 5) / (1000 * 3600); 
    float energyLoad3 = (powerLoad3 * 5) / (1000 * 3600); 
    float energyLoad4 = (powerLoad4 * 5) / (1000 * 3600); 
 
    // Accumulate total energy consumption per load 
    totalEnergyLoad1 += energyLoad1; 
    totalEnergyLoad2 += energyLoad2; 
    totalEnergyLoad3 += energyLoad3; 
    totalEnergyLoad4 += energyLoad4; SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
78  
 
    // Calculate the correct bill per load 
    float billLoad1 = totalEnergyLoad1 * TARIFF; 
    float billLoad2 = totalEnergyLoad2 * TARIFF; 
    float billLoad3 = totalEnergyLoad3 * TARIFF; 
    float billLoad4 = totalEnergyLoad4 * TARIFF; 
 
    // Calculate total bill 
    float totalBill = billLoad1 + billLoad2 + billLoad3 + billLoad4; 
 
    // Display on LCD 
    lcd.clear(); 
    lcd.setCursor(0, 0); 
    lcd.print("V: "); lcd.print(voltage); 
    lcd.print(" I: "); lcd.print(current); 
 
    lcd.setCursor(0, 1); 
    lcd.print("B: "); lcd.print(totalBill); 
 
    // Send data to Blynk 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V0, voltage); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V1, current); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V2, power); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V3, energy); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V4, frequency); SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
79  
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V5, pf); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V6, totalBill); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V7, billLoad1); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V8, billLoad2); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V9, billLoad3); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V10,billLoad4); 
 
    // Send individual current readings to Blynk 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V15, currentLoad1); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V16, currentLoad2); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V17, currentLoad3); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V18, currentLoad4); 
    Blynk.virtualWrite(V19, totalCurrent); 
 
    // Send data to ThingSpeak 
    sendToThingSpeak(voltage, current, power, energy, totalBill, billLoad1, billLoad2, 
billLoad3); 
 
    delay(15000); // 15-second delay for ThingSpeak update 
} 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
80  
 
CHAPTER 5 
Testing and Result Analysis 
 
5.1 Test case 1: 
 
1. When All the Loads are off without load connection 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1  All Loads are off and not connect 
 
 
Fig 5.2 Blynk Dashboard without any load 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
81  
 
5.2  Test case 2 
 
 
When Load 1 is in ON condition 
 
Fig 5.3 When Load 1 is in ON Condition 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5.4 Blynk Dashboard when Load 1 is ON 
 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
82  
 
5.3 Test case 3 
 
 
When Load 2 is in ON condition 
 
 
 
Fig.5.5 When Load 2 is in ON condition 
 
 
 
Fig 5.6 Blynk Dashboard when Load 2 in ON condition 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
83  
 
5.4 Test case 4 
 
 
When Load 3 is connected 
 
 
Fig 5.7 When Load 3 is in ON condition 
 
 
 
 
Fig 5.8 Blynk Dash Board when Load 3 is ON 
 
 
 
 
SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
84  
 
 
 
5.5 Test case 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMART ENERGY METER WITH REALTIME MONITORING AND PREDICTIVE BILL 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
85  
Conclusion and Future Scope 
Conclusion 
The Smart Energy Meter project successfully achieved its goals of real-time 
monitoring, predictive bill analysis, and remote load control. The integration of IoT 
technology through Blynk added flexibility and enhanced user interaction with the 
system. 
The system provides an efficient way for users to monitor energy consumption, control 
home appliances remotely, and adopt energy-saving habits based on real-time 
feedback. 
The project demonstrates a low-cost, scalable solution for smart energy management at 
the household and industrial levels. 
 
Future Scope 
Although the current system fulfills its basic requirements, several improvements and 
expansions can be incorporated in the future: 
 Mobile Notifications: 
Adding push notifications through Blynk when voltage, current, or energy 
thresholds are exceeded. 
 Data Logging: 
Storing historical consumption data in the cloud for detailed energy usage 
reports. 
 Voice Assistant Integration: 
Connecting the system with Google Assistant, Alexa, or Siri for voice-
controlled appliance management. 
 Solar Power Monitoring: 
Integrating solar panels and monitoring their power generation to promote the 
use of renewable energy sources. 
 Energy Saving Suggestions: 
Implementing AI-based algorithms to analyze energy consumption patterns and 
suggest ways to reduce electricity bills. 
 Three-Phase System Expansion: 
Modifying the system to monitor three-phase industrial loads. 
  
 
KKR & KSR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCES 
(Autonomous) 
Accredited by NBA & NAAC with Grade “A” and Affiliated to JNTUK-Kakinada 
Vinjanampadu, Vatticherukuru Mandal, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh522017 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING 
 
PROJECT QR SCANNER FORM 
Academic Year:2024-2025 Batch: 10 
 
NAME OF THE GUIDE: Mrs. SD. Vaheedha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BATCH MEMBERS- SIGNATURE 
 
 
1. DAMARAVARAPU NAGA JASWANTH (22JR5A0406)  
 
2. EKA. P. L. NARASIMHA (21JR1A0459)  
3. BANISETTY AAKASH (21JR1A0436 )  
4. B ASHOK BABU (21JR1A0446)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGNATURE OF GUIDE SIGNATURE OF HOD 
